Food Prices and Obesity: Evidence and Policy Implications for Taxes and Subsidies

Authors: Powell Chaloupka

Abstract:
Context: Pricing policies have been posited as potential policy instruments to address the increasing prevalence of obesity. This article examines whether altering the cost of unhealthy, energy-dense foods, compared with healthy, less- dense foods through the use of fiscal pricing (tax or subsidy) policy instruments would, in fact, change food consumption patterns and overall diet enough to significantly reduce individuals’ weight outcomes.

Methods: This article examined empirical evidence regarding the food and restaurant price sensitivity of weight outcomes based on a literature search to identify peer-reviewed English-language articles published between 1990 and 2008. Studies were identified from the Medline, PubMed, Econlit, and PAIS databases. The fifteen search combinations used the terms obesity, body mass index, and BMI each in combination with the terms price, prices, tax, taxation, and subsidy.

Findings: The studies reviewed showed that when statistically significant as- sociations were found between food and restaurant prices (taxes) and weight outcomes, the effects were generally small in magnitude, although in some cases they were larger for low–socioeconomic status (SES) populations and for those at risk for overweight or obesity.

Conclusions: The limited existing evidence suggests that small taxes or subsi- dies are not likely to produce significant changes in BMI or obesity prevalence but that nontrivial pricing interventions may have some measurable effects on Americans’ weight outcomes, particularly for children and adolescents, low-SES populations, and those most at risk for overweight. Additional re- search is needed to be able to draw strong policy conclusions regarding the effectiveness of fiscal-pricing interventions aimed at reducing obesity.

Summary:

In a recent empirical review, Powell and Chaloupka discuss the impact of various price interventions on food: who would get effected, by how much, and important considerations and takeaways.

By looking at the results of nine original empirical studies that looked at the intersection of food prices and obesity and other weight-related outcomes. They conclude that children and young adults are generally more price sensitive. Furthermore, they bring up the important fact that changes in consumption as a response to price changes have been observed in controlled environments, the level of external validity may be low because the individual may compensate in another, uncontrolled environment.

One of the consistent limitations across these studies was the fact that most of them were cross-sectional, which limits the studies ability to draw conclusions about the causal relationships between food price and obesity. Furthermore, there a problem with looking at prices affect on weight outcomes because price may be an indicator of local competition. Prices may be lower because of greater food store availability, thus, the driver of a change in weight-related outcomes may be the result of greater availability and not necessarily lower price. Therefore it is very important to control for this availability factor, which only a subset of the studies did. Overall, the review of the studies illustrated that were generally not strong relationships between food price and weight-related outcomes. However, there were some instances where the effects were more pronounced for low-socieoeconomic groups and those at high risk for overweight and obesity.

Challenges to Price Interventions:
Such policies, especially taxes, will likely face pressure from the general public, special interest groups, and affected industries. In some cases there has already been push back from snack and soft drink products. That said, policies aimed at obesity in children are generally more widely accepted. Only 39 percent favored increasing the tax on fast foods and other less healthy foods marketed to children, but 64% of respondents were willing to pay an extra $50 in taxes towards more nutritious school lunches (Evans et al. 2005).

The Past, Learning from Taxing Tobacco:
Some individuals are comparing tobacco policy of the past to food policy of today. That said, there are a couple key differences between products. One, a tobacco product is much easier to define than an unhealthy or healthy product. Second, tobacco products are clearly harmful, as proven by many logitudinal studies (citations). Lastly, tobacco products are much easier to tax; there are fewer producers, fewer products, and fewer modes of consumption.

That said, if people are erious about taxing or certain foods, there is much to learn about how the tobacco policies were implemented. Firstly, as evident by the tobacco indsustry, those in favor of food taxes can certainly epect significant push back from whatever indusrties are negatively (or not positively) affected as the result of any price intervention, as was the case for the tobacoco indsutry. Also, we can learn something about the demographics that were affected. Many people argued against tobacco taxes because they would be regressive for low-income indivduals. This argument was combated by implementing support programs, tobacco control programs, which include educational, regulatory, and clinical progrmas.



Other:
Cawley's economic framework of obesity has three constraints:
1. The standard budget constraint
2. A time constraint spent between leisure and production activities
3. A biology constraint such that changes in caloric intake and/or energy expenditure affect weight over time.